How do we build low-cost, low-power datacenters using commodity hardware?
What does a distributed datacenter look like?

Our various UK-based research groups have investigated Raspberry Pi devices as lightweight nodes in scaled-down datacenters [1], micro-supercomputers [2] and delay-tolerant networks [3].
The beauty of the Raspberry Pi, and similar cut-down ARM development boards, is that they can be powered by AA batteries or miniature solar panels. Further, the compute units are cheap enough to be effectively disposable.

We plan to combine our resources and expertise to investigate distributed, sustainable, billion-core datacenters.
We want to investigate use-case scenarios for building federated 'virtual' datacenters from vast arrays of distrbuted, low-power, commodity processors.

> The suitability and viability of test-beds proposed for connection

The Glasgow Raspberry Pi Cloud has around 100 nodes spread between Glasgow and Liverpool. It is a fully featured cloud environment, running a software stack based on Linux and Docker. It is orchestrated by Kubernetes, which is standard cloud management software deployed by Google. 
The Southampton Iridis-Pi Cluster has around 60 nodes. It is a fully featured cluster, running a software stack based on Linux and MPI.
The Cambridge RasPiNET is a scalable, decentralized platform, currently used for sensing applications over a delay tolerant network, based on the RFC5050 protocol.

> The availability and justification for connection infrastructure

We intend to vary the connectivity between the distributed micro-datacentres. We will range from data-mule style delay-tolerant networking (as currently used in Cambridge with the Iridium Satellite network) to ultra-high-speed interconnect via dedicated Janet LightPath routes, effectively creating a single logical datacenter from our disparate units. 
This controlled variation in connectivity will be part of our experimental framework, investigating the tradeoffs involved in the various connection possibilities.

> The fit to EPSRC priorities, in particular (but not exclusively) those of the ICT and 
> Digital Economy Themes

* Sustainable Society:  Each micro-datacenter will be low-cost and low-power. The power comes from the interconnected nature of the federated whole.
* IT as a Utility: We are proposing a new paradigm for peer-to-peer, decentralized cloud computing.
* Robotics and Autonomous Systems: 



> The value added by connecting the test-beds

* leverage existing hardware and expertise at four UK sites
In our experience, the biggest challenge has been setting up software stacks on the RPi nodes. Now this is completed, we can work on compelling and innovative use-case scenarios.

> The strategic vision

We want to develop compelling demonstrator scenarios. Examples might be:
- mining and recognition in disaster zones - imagine piloting drones to help rescuers locate victims of earthquakes via a decentralized network.
- rural datacenters - each local datacenter computes info locally, makes this available to local residents, in a dashboard format. Also uploads info to central repo when possible.
- a federation of personal micro-datacenters. Imagine using all the devices you have (smartphone, smartwatch, laptop) as a personal-area datacenter. Compute so as to conserve power in all - send appropriate jobs to appropriate places, etc. This leads onto the concept of peer-to-peer social networking. Abandon Facebook and let everyone have their own mailserver, blog and calendar. The management of this distributed infrastructure is a key research challenge.
- content-centric networking - caches everywhere. every router becomes a cache. Smart cache in the home - programmable infrastructure needed here.
- rural datacenter alliance. Renewable power drives small, self-sustaining micro-datacenters that federate to provide services, as opposed to the current paradigm of `big-blob' infrastructure.

We note that HiPEAC / EU / ARM are engaged in building a low-power supercomputer (Mont Blanc project). Our distinct position is that low-power processors should be deployed in other large-scale systems areas than `just' traditional high-performance computing.



[1] Tso, F.P., White, D.R., Jouet, S., Singer, J., and Pezaros, D.P. (2013) The Glasgow raspberry pi cloud: a scale model for cloud computing infrastructures. In: First International Workshop on Resource Management of Cloud Computing (CCRM), Philadelphia, PA, USA, 8-11 Jul 2013, pp. 108-112. (doi:10.1109/ICDCSW.2013.25)

[2] Cox, Simon, Cox, James, Boardman, Richard, Johnston, Steven J., Scott, Mark and O'Brien, Neil (2013) Iridis-pi: a low-cost, compact demonstration cluster. Cluster Computing, 1-10. (doi:10.1007/s10586-013-0282-7)

[3] Yoneki, Eiko. (2014) RasPiNET: decentralised communication and sensing platform with satellite connectivity. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM MobiCom workshop on Challenged networks (CHANTS '14). 81-84.
(doi:10.1145/2645672.2645691) 


